docs: Update backwards compatibility policy for Rust SDK (#32655)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/developing/backwards-compatibility.md

deprecated features. Client SDKs and tooling will begin using new features and endpoints
that were enabled in the previous `MAJOR` version.

The Rust SDK will not have any future `MAJOR` releases, and will stay on `1.X` to
provide a better developer experience. More details in

> [Why not just use semver](#why-not-just-use-semver).

Reviewer: I wonder if this is a bit too restrictive.
There seems to be no reason to say we will never increase the major release number.
It does seem quite unlikely at the moment.
But things may change.

We do want to be explicit about the currently chosen default policy of staying on `1.x`.
So we can, maybe, say something along the lines of:

> We do not expect `MAJOR` version to be changed.  Any breaking changes will be done though the deprecation process described in [...] in a `MINOR` version.

If you think it is too subtle, it is probably fine to keep the more assertive "no `MAJOR` version updates" statement as well.

Also, this paragraph seems to contradict the previous one, that explain when happens in a major version update.  If we are saying they never happen, there is no point in this explanation.

Author: > I wonder if this is a bit too restrictive.

You're right, I think I was a little too inspired by our chats.

> Also, this paragraph seems to contradict the previous one, that explain when happens in a major version update. If we are saying they never happen, there is no point in this explanation.

And you're right about the contradiction -- this document also covers RPC endpoints, and I didn't want to have the policy apply to both RPC and SDK.

I'll make it clearer which parts cover RPC and which parts cover the SDK.

those changes have been patched as needed and proven to be reliable, the `MINOR` version will
be upgraded to the `stable` release channel and deployed to the Mainnet Beta cluster.

The Rust SDK may contain breaking changes and removal of previously deprecated features
in a `MINOR` release. According to code upgrade difficulty, every `MINOR` release
will be compatible with at least the 3 preceding `MINOR` releases and 3 future
`MINOR` releases.

For example, software using version `1.20` will be compatible with versions up
to `1.23` going forward, and back to `1.17`. Any release numbers that are skipped,
such as `1.15`, are not considered in this calculation.

At a projected cadence of 4 minor releases per year, that gives developers at least

> one year to update a project.

Author: You're right to bring this up, and I did certainly consider it. The focus was to give a very clear demarcation in terms of when things could be deprecated. But it's true that we don't want to keep things around for more than a year if releases go slow again for whatever reason.

I changed this to say "at least one year" everywhere

those changes have been patched as needed and proven to be reliable, the `MINOR` version will
be upgraded to the `stable` release channel and deployed to the Mainnet Beta cluster.

The Rust SDK may contain breaking changes and removal of previously deprecated features

> in a `MINOR` release. According to code upgrade difficulty, every `MINOR` release

Author: Maybe "according to the extent of code changes required for upgrade"? The whole point is to give us some wiggle room. But maybe we can simply be more forceful and remove "According to code upgrade difficulty"

> in a `MINOR` release. According to code upgrade difficulty, every `MINOR` release

Author: Removed as suggested

breaking changes.

#### SemVer in Rust

Under SemVer, breaking changes, such as removal of functions or types, only happens
in a new major version.

In many situations, this is useful -- it is undesirable to pick up a breaking
change accidentally. The default dependency declaration in Cargo follows SemVer.
It assumes that all minor versions are compatible, and will automatically update
to the newest minor version available.

For example, if you declare `solana-program = "1.10"`, Cargo can pull in version
`1.16`, since it assumes that all `1.X.Y` releases are compatible.

If, however, Cargo deems that two versions of a package are incompatible, it will
treat them as two completely separate packages.

Packages can be deemed incompatible for many reasons, but the most common situation
under the default declaration format (SemVer) is due to different major versions.

If a package ends up with two or more instances of `solana-program`,
[bad things will happen](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/resolver.html#version-incompatibility-hazards),
either at compile-time or runtime, if the conflicting types in the public APIs

> are ever used together.

Reviewer 2: Could you explain why [the Semver trick](https://github.com/dtolnay/semver-trick) cannot be used to re-export types in the event of a 2.x release?  It seems as though that would work.  My initial assumption is that there would be too many types to deal with.

This page links to the "version incompatibility hazards" section of the cargo reference, but the cargo reference indicates a solution.  So imho this section should say why that solution will not work in this case.

Because of these issues, developers should only want one instance of `solana-program`
in their project. This includes *all* direct and indirect dependencies: they should
all use the same `solana-program`.

If developers all use the default versioning declaration with major version `1`,
then we can ensure that only one version of `solana-program` exists in the resolution.

The specifics of the Cargo resolver are beyond the scope of this document.
You can find more information about the Cargo resolver in
[The Cargo Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/resolver.html).

#### So what's your solution?

We would like all releases to be 100% backwards compatible, allowing everyone
to upgrade at any time with no effort.  This model, however, would put overly
strict constraints on the development of the Rust SDK crates, considering we cannot

> in practice increase the major version.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand. All the reasons for a different method than semver here seems to lead to that you `cannot in practice increase the major version`

Why is that?

Author: This was covered in a previous commit, but I removed it. Adding it here for more motivation:

> Cargo will force all crates in a build to use the same major version
of a dependency. For example, if your crate `my-crate` declares `solana-program = "1.10"`,
and a dependency `my-dependency` declares `solana-program = "1.16"`, both your crate and your
dependency will be built with version `1.16`, at least.

> Additionally, the types in `solana-program` used by both your crate and your
dependency are treated as the same.

> For example, if `solana-program` has a struct declared as:

```
#[derive(PartialEq)]
pub struct Pubkey(pub [u8; 32]);
```

> And `my-dependency` has:

```
pub const DEPENDENCY_PUBKEY = Pubkey([1; 32]);
```

> Then `my-crate` can say:

```
use solana_program::Pubkey;
let my_pubkey = Pubkey([1; 32]);
if my_pubkey == my_dependency::DEPENDENCY_PUBKEY {
    println!("They're the same");
}
```

> On the other hand, types from crates with different major versions are treated as
completely different types. If `my-crate` declares `solana-program = "2"` and
`my-dependency` declares `solana-program = "1"`, then the preceding code *will not*
compile.

> To get this code to compile, you need to create functions to convert between the
types in v1 and v2. And whenever v3 is released, the entire problem becomes multiplied.

But either way, I don't think we should move forward with changing this. I'll provide an update in the main semver issue.

If a package ends up with two or more instances of `solana-program`,
[bad things will happen](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/resolver.html#version-incompatibility-hazards),
either at compile-time or runtime, if the conflicting types in the public APIs
are ever used together.

Because of these issues, developers should only want one instance of `solana-program`
in their project.

If developers all use the default versioning declaration with major version `1`,
then we can ensure that only one version of `solana-program` exists in the resolution.

The specifics of the Cargo resolver are beyond the scope of this document.
You can find more information about the Cargo resolver in
[The Cargo Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/resolver.html).

#### So what's your solution?

Rather than forcing developers to disentangle these kinds of messes on every
major version release, our solution is to keep everything on the same major version.

However, to avoid chaos and ensure that no downstream client ever breaks from updating
from one `MINOR` version to the next, we must provide new functions or structs

> and deprecate the old ones.

Author: This is much better, thanks

> We have broken this commitment in the past, but through expanded downstream
> testing and conscientiously exposing APIs, we aim to never repeat that mistake.
> If it does happen accidentally, we will do whatever is necessary to restore
> the functionality, within reason.

Reviewer: It is your call, you were working in this area for way longer than I did.
So, maybe it is a good thing to reference what happened in the past here.
But I personally would not include references to what happened in the past into the policy.

There is no magical way that always ensures 100% compatibility.
At least, I am not aware of one.
Except for not making any changes at all.

So the best we can do is the only thing we can do: we need to run tests to verify our promises.
And, I assume, everyone knows that test are not 100% reliable.
Test coverage matters and greatly affects the chances of a mistake, but it is, as everything else, is a subject of engineering time invested.
I think, we would be making an impossible commitment by saying "never".

I am not sure if policy needs to talk about the implementation details, but if we want to, maybe we could say something like:

```suggestion
We are in a process of setting up tests that verify compatibility guarantees to match
our policy.  But, as any test, it may have gaps andit is subject to engineering time
invested in the test coverage.  Tier 1 are major Solana ecosystem libraries, such as:

 * [Solana Program Library] (https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library)
 * [Anchor](https://docs.rs/anchor-lang/latest/anchor_lang)
 * [Metaplex Token Library] (https://github.com/metaplex-foundation/metaplex-program-library)

Should we break our compatibility, we will do whatever is necessary to restore the
functionality, within reason.
```

I am actually not sure if the "Tier 1" list should be included here, nor if this is
the content for this list.  I just looked at the top dependencies of:
 * the `solana-program` crate: https://crates.io/crates/solana-program/reverse_dependencies
 * the `soalan-sdk` crate: https://crates.io/crates/solana-sdk/reverse_dependencies

Should we also include [Pyth](https://crates.io/crates/pyth-sdk-solana)?

Author: I would leave out the list and just explain that we're setting up tests. Much better, thanks!

for a human reader is subject to change. This includes output as well as potential help, warning, or
error messages.

### Why not just use semver

The Solana Rust SDK crates use a model for introducing breaking changes that does
*not* follow semantic versioning (semver).

#### Semver in Rust

Under semver, breaking changes, such as removal of functions or types, only happens
in a new major version.

In many situations, this is useful -- it's very difficult to pick up a breaking
change accidentally. The default dependency declaration in Cargo follows this
concept. It assumes that all minor versions are compatible, and will automatically
update to the newest minor version available.

For example, if you declare `solana-program = "1.10"`, Cargo can pull in version
`1.16`, since it assumes that all `1.X.Y` releases are compatible.

Additionally, Cargo will force all crates in a build to use the same major version
of a dependency. For example, if your crate `my-crate` declares `solana-program = "1.10"`,
and a dependency `my-dependency` declares `solana-program = "1.16"`, both your crate and your

> dependency will be built with version `1.16`, at least.

Author: I see, I wasn't aware that cargo could pull in multiple versions of a dependency on the same major version. Thanks for clarifying! I changed this whole section to emphasize your three points

Additionally, the types in `solana-program` used by both your crate and your

> dependency are treated as the same.

Author: I'll remove this whole part as you suggested previously, since there's no need for us to describe cargo

For example, if `solana-program` has a struct declared as:

```
#[derive(PartialEq)]
pub struct Pubkey(pub [u8; 32]);
```

And `my-dependency` has:

```
pub const DEPENDENCY_PUBKEY = Pubkey([1; 32]);
```

Then `my-crate` can say:

```
use solana_program::Pubkey;
let my_pubkey = Pubkey([1; 32]);
if my_pubkey == my_dependency::DEPENDENCY_PUBKEY {
    println!("They're the same");
}
```

On the other hand, types from crates with different major versions are treated as
completely different types. If `my-crate` declares `solana-program = "2"` and
`my-dependency` declares `solana-program = "1"`, then the preceding code *will not*

> compile.

Author: `solana-sdk` can't be used on-chain, so on-chain programs must use the types from the `solana-program` crate, and all of the problems from the upgrade stem from the `solana-program` crate.

So if we want to be practical, `solana-program` is the better example. But if you find it very unclear, we can change to `solana-sdk`.

#### So what's your solution?

Rather than forcing developers to disentangle these kinds of messes on every
major version release, our solution is to keep everything on the same major version.

However, to avoid chaos and ensure that no downstream client ever breaks from updating
from one `MINOR` version to the next, we must provide new functions or structs
and deprecate the old ones.

We have broken this commitment in the past, but through expanded downstream
testing and conscientiously exposing APIs, we aim to never repeat that mistake.
If it does happen accidentally, we will do whatever is necessary to restore
the functionality, within reason.

To avoid maintaining too much old code, however, we reserve the right to remove
deprecated code after at least one year, or roughly 4 `MINOR` versions later.

This model has precedents in the Rust ecosystem. Through
[Rust editions](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/05/11/edition-2021.html#what-is-an-edition),
the Rust developers can introduce backwards-incompatible changes, all while staying
on major version 1. As crate developers, we have less flexibility than a language,

> but the concept is similar.

Author: I like that -- updated to include the article and quote

Additionally, the
[Minimum Supported Rust Version (MSRV) Policies](https://github.com/rust-lang/api-guidelines/discussions/231)
suggest that updating MSRV is *not* a semver breaking change, even though it
effectively forces users to upgrade their compiler just to update a crate.

By ensuring that projects will never immediately break, and giving developers
one year to update, this model will keep some stability while avoiding stagnation.

> #### But why was the upgrade to 1.16 so difficult?

Author: Yeah you're absolutely right :sweat_smile: I wanted to provide some historical record so we know what motivated this change. What do you think about adding it as a post-mortem in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/32503 ?
